---
title: "Module 1: What is Web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]"
permalink: /curricula/introduction-to-web-[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]/what-is-web-[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]/
ref: /curricula/introduction-to-web-[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]/what-is-web-[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]/
lang: en
github:
  repository: w3c/wai-curricula
  path: content/1-1.md
license: creative-commons
footer: >
  <p><strong>Date:</strong> First published 3 December 2019 </p>
  <p><strong>Editors:</strong> Daniel Montalvo and <a href="http://www.w3.org/People/shadi/">Shadi Abou-Zahra</a>. Contributors: <a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/EO/EOWG-members">EOWG Participants</a></p>
  <p>Developed by the Education and Outreach Working Group (<a href="http://www.w3.org/WAI/EO/">EOWG</a>). Developed with support from the <a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/about/projects/wai-guide/">WAI-Guide Project</a> funded by the European Commission (EC) under the Horizon 2020 program (Grant Agreement 822245).</p>
navigation:
  previous: /curricula/introduction-to-web-[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]/
  next: /curricula/introduction-to-web-[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]/people-and-digital-technology/
---

## Introduction
{:.no-display}

Courses based on this module:

* Raise awareness of how people with disabilities use websites and applications.
* Introduce core concepts of digital [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities].
* Explain related terms such as usability, user experience, and inclusive design.

## Learning Outcomes for Module

Students should be able to:

* Describe examples of how people with disabilities use the Web.
* Define web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] for people with disabilities.
* Describe how the Web is used on devices such as mobile phones, smart TVs, watches, and home appliances.
* Define key terms in web and digital [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities].

## Competencies

Skills required for this module.

Students:

* Basic understanding of computers and the Web.

Instructors:

* Good understanding of digital [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] and inclusion.
* In-depth knowledge of [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] principles and inclusive design.
* Expertise in working with people with different disabilities.

## Topics to Teach

Optional topics to achieve the learning outcomes.

{% include excol.html type="all" %}

{% include excol.html type="start" %}

### Topic: Stories of People with Disabilities

{% include excol.html type="middle" %}

Introduce real stories of how people with disabilities interact with web pages and applications. If you can, invite people with disabilities to demonstrate assistive technologies and adaptive strategies they use. Include time for students to ask questions. If you cannot bring real people, refer to [Web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] Perspectives Videos](/perspective-videos/) and [How People with Disabilities Use the Web](/people-use-web/). Mention examples like structured versus unstructured text and complex versus simple language, as potential barriers for everybody. 

#### Learning Outcomes for Topic

Students should be able to:

* Describe how some people with disabilities use the Web.
* List some design features that benefit people with disabilities.
* List some design barriers that exclude people with disabilities.
* Recognize the impact of accessible versus inaccessible design.

#### Teaching Ideas for Topic

Optional ideas to teach the learning outcomes:

* Point out how design features can enhance people's quality of life by teaching the social model of disability. Refer to Introduction to Web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] page, [[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] in Context section](/fundamentals/[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]-intro/#context).
* Invite expert users with disabilities to show the assistive technologies and adaptive strategies they use when interacting with online banking, online shopping or eGovernment. Ask these users to explain  how technology and the Web benefits them.
* Coach students in trying out assistive technologies and adaptive strategies by themselves. For example, invite them to follow advanced users and experiment with text to speech, speech recognition, and other [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] features built into their mobile phones. Ask students to reflect on their experiences.
* Explain how different [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] features and barriers affect use of the content with assistive technologies and adaptive strategies. For an introduction to certain assistive tools and adaptive strategies, refer to [Tools and Techniques](/people-use-web/tools-techniques/).

**Important:**
* Emphasize the diversity among people with disabilities, even when those users have the same type of disability.
* For information on avoiding clichés and myths, see [Interacting with People with Disabilities {% include_cached external.html %}](http://www.uiaccess.com/accessucd/interact.html).

#### Ideas to Assess Knowledge for Topic

Optional ideas to support assessment:

* Practice &mdash; Students explore the use of assistive technologies to perform a task, such as reading the news, making a purchase, or interacting in social networks. Assess students' capacity to understand how the assistive technology functions and interact with it.
* Presentation &mdash; Students present digital life and most important use cases for a particular type of disability they are interested in. Assess students' capacity to reflect on the benefits of computers and the Web for people with disabilities.
* Portfolio &mdash; Students research about how technology helped popular people with disabilities in their daily lives. Examples: Frida Kahlo, Stephen Hawking, or Stevie Wonder. Assess students' capacity to identify how people with disabilities use technology.

{% include excol.html type="end" %} 

{% include excol.html type="start" %}

### Topic: Scope of Web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]

{% include excol.html type="middle" %}

Introduce the definition and scope of web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]. Present common terminology in [Introduction to Web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]](/fundamentals/[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]-intro/).

Explain the overlaps between [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] and usability. Emphasize how [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] fits into design practices such as inclusive design. Refer to [[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities], Usability, and Inclusion](/fundamentals/[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]-usability-inclusion/).

#### Learning Outcomes for Topic

Students should be able to:

* Define web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] for people with disabilities.
* Identify the relevance of web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] in a growing number of devices and contexts.
* Explain key terms in web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities].
* Outline the scope of [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities], usability, and inclusion, and describe some of the overlaps between them.
* Identify the social dimension of [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities].

#### Teaching Ideas for Topic

Optional ideas to teach the learning outcomes:

* Define web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] as the ability for people with disabilities to use web content, tools, and technology equally.
* Guide students through a reflection on the relevance of web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]. Focus on the widespread use of web content and applications across different types of devices (desktop, mobile, television, etc.). Emphasize that [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] favors social participation (for education, employment, commerce, healthcare, entertainment, etc.). Encourage students to participate in the discussion by adding any previous experiences of access barriers and exposure to [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities].
* Engage students in a conversation about the relationship between [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] for people with disabilities and other people: older people, people not fluent in a language, people new to technology or with lower digital skills, and others.
* Explain that [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] is part of overall inclusion, since [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] features benefit all users as well as those with disabilities.
* Define usability as the discipline of designing products to be effective, efficient, and satisfying. Describe some overlaps in usability
and [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]. Explain that [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] is needed to cover those aspects from the perspective of people with disabilities.
* Introduce examples of [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] in urban environments, buildings, transportation, etc. Explain how these relate to the digital context. Use ramps and high-contrast features to illustrate how [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] characteristics are also beneficial for all users.
* Refer to [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] as a social right for people with disabilities under the United Nations [Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UN CRPD)](https://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities.html).

#### Ideas to Assess Knowledge for Topic

Optional ideas to support assessment:

* Debate &mdash; From a given set of [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] features in buildings, transportation, education, or healthcare, students draw analogies to web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] and share with their peers. Assess students' capacity to recognize how some features help make digital products accessible.
* Presentation &mdash; Students select a device (e.g., computer, smartphone, smartwatch, television, etc.) and describe the [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] features and settings that are available on that device. Assess students' capacity to identify [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] features in a given product.
* Presentation &mdash; Students describe a feature or setting and elaborate on how it benefits many people. Assess students' capacity to identify use cases where people enjoys these features regardless of disability.

{% include excol.html type="end" %}

## Ideas to Assess Knowledge for Module

Optional ideas to support assessment:

* Reflective Journal &mdash; Students reflect on how accessible technology benefits people, regardless of disability. Assess students' capacity to identify how [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] can promote overall inclusion.
* Short Answer Questions &mdash; Students describe in their own words terms such as web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities], usability, and inclusion. Assess students' capacity to describe these terms clearly and succinctly.
* Report &mdash; Students explain the role of web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] in other technologies beyond web pages and applications. Assess students' capacity to describe how [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] features apply to different types of content.
* Presentation &mdash; Students describe some features and barriers that people with disabilities encounter when using technology. Assess students' capacity to identify instances and describe the impact that they have on people with disabilities.

## Teaching Resources

Suggested resources to support your teaching:

* [How People with Disabilities Use the Web](/people-use-web/) &mdash; Provides stories of people with disabilities using the Web; describes types of disabilities and some of the barriers that people encounter using the Web; and introduces types of assistive technologies and adaptive strategies that some people use.
* [Web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] Perspectives (videos)](/perspective-videos/) &mdash; Is a series of 1-minute videos that demonstrate that web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] is essential for people with disabilities and useful for all. They show [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] features, how they impact people with disabilities, and how they benefit everyone in a variety of situations.
* [Introduction to Web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]](/fundamentals/[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]-intro/) &mdash; Provides an overview of web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] and a 4-minute video with examples of [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] features and barriers.
* [Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD)](https://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities.html) &mdash; Lists the countries that signed and ratified the convention and optional protocol, and provides news and information on implementation of the convention.
* [[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities], Usability, and Inclusion](/fundamentals/[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]-usability-inclusion/) &mdash; Explains the distinctions and overlaps between the terms [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities], usability, and inclusion, and how these are best addressed together using a user-centered design process.

{% include excol.html type="all" %}
