---
title: "Module 3: Business Case and Benefits"
permalink: /curricula/introduction-to-web-[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]/business-case-and-benefits/
ref: /curricula/introduction-to-web-[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]/business-case-and-benefits/
lang: en
github:
  repository: w3c/wai-curricula
  path: content/1-3.md
license: creative-commons
footer: >
  <p><strong>Date:</strong> First published 3 December 2019 </p>
  <p><strong>Editors:</strong> Daniel Montalvo and <a href="http://www.w3.org/People/shadi/">Shadi Abou-Zahra</a>. Contributors: <a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/EO/EOWG-members">EOWG Participants</a>. </p>
  <p>Developed by the Education and Outreach Working Group (<a href="http://www.w3.org/WAI/EO/">EOWG</a>). Developed with support from the <a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/about/projects/wai-guide/">WAI-Guide Project</a> funded by the European Commission (EC) under the Horizon 2020 program (Grant Agreement 822245).</p>
navigation:
  previous: /curricula/introduction-to-web-[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]/people-and-digital-technology/
  next: /curricula/introduction-to-web-[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]/principles-standards-and-checks/
---

## Introduction
{:.no-display}
 
Courses based on this module:

* Explore the rationale for organizations to address [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities].
* Present examples of organizations addressing [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities].

## Learning Outcomes for Module

Students should be able to:

* Explain how [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] can:
  * Extend market reach.
  * Demonstrate social responsibility.
  * Drive innovation.
  * Minimize legal risk.

## Competencies

Skills required for this module.

Students:

* Basic understanding of:
  * Computers and the Web.
  * [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] concepts and terminology.
  * How people with disabilities use the Web.

Instructors:

* Excellent understanding of [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities], usability, and inclusion.
* Applied knowledge of business benefits related to [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities].

## Topics to Teach

Optional topics to achieve the learning outcomes.

{% include excol.html type="all" %}

{% include excol.html type="start" %}

### Topic: Benefits of [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]

{% include excol.html type="middle" %}

Introduce business case benefits of [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]. Provide examples of organizations that have adopted [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]. For more information on this, refer to [The Business Case for Digital [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]](/business-case/).

#### Learning Outcomes for Topic

Students should be able to:

* List examples of organizations that have adopted [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities], and the benefits these organizations report.
* Explain how [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] can:
  * Benefit people with and without disabilities.
  * Enhance brand reputation and help demonstrate social responsibility.
  * Help reduce overall maintenance and remediation costs.
  * Promote human-centered design approaches, which result in more usable products.
* Describe some potential risks of not addressing [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities], such as possible lawsuits and costly litigations.

#### Teaching Ideas  for Topic

Optional ideas to teach the learning outcomes:

* Introduce case studies of organizations who have adopted [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]. Explain the resulting benefits, such as improved brand reputation or improved search results ranking.
* Compare the cost and effectiveness of integrating [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] requirements into a project from the start versus integrating [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] later. Discuss the need to integrate [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] requirements and standards into procurement as well as development processes.
* Provide analogies between digital [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities], and social and architectural [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]. For example, relate digital [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] to curb cuts in sidewalks that benefit people with strollers, carts, luggage, bicycles, etc.
* Discuss how [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] features benefit many people in different situations, such as mobile phone users, older adults, and people using different hardware. Explain that many features originally designed for [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] have become mainstream, such as text to speech, voice controls, captions, etc.
* Promote discussion among students about which [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] features they are familiar with. For example, ask them if they have used voice to dictate or to listen to messages. Elaborate on how these features improve overall user experience.
* Explain legal requirements relevant to some organizations, for example, national and regional policies. Outline the increasing uptake internationally, including in the [UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD)](https://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities.html).
* Provide some examples of legal incidences with organizations in your region. If it is not possible, you can use examples from [The Business Case for Digital [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] (Minimize Legal Risk)](/business-case/#minimize-legal-risk).
* Refer to specific legal cases related to [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] and present their settlements or outcomes. Find cases that were both upheld as well as dismissed to determine the reasons for the outcome and explore why the case was brought.

#### Ideas to Assess Knowledge for Topic

Optional ideas to support assessment:

* Practice &mdash; Students perform a specific task with the virtual assistant in their mobile phones. For example, students read the news, query the weather, or check items into a shopping cart. Assess students' capacity to recognize innovation behind features originally design for [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] that many people use nowadays.
* Portfolio &mdash; Students research how an organization could benefit from improving [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]. Assess students' capacity to outline business opportunities gained from taking this approach.
* Presentation &mdash; Students research and describe different mainstream [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] features that they are already using, for example on their mobile phone, or [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] features that they may want to use in the future. Assess students' capacity to identify  [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] features that others can enjoy.
* Report &mdash; Students write a report about publicly-available [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] testimonials and business case arguments from different organizations. Advise students that testimonials are often not easy to verify and may require further analysis. Assess students' capacity to identify business case arguments that others are using to implement [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities].
* Reflective Journal &mdash; Students study article 9 of the [Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD)](https://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities.html) and share their understanding of the core concepts of it. Assess students' understanding of the core concepts of article 9.
* Portfolio &mdash; Students research if there are [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] laws and policies applicable to an organization of their choice. Assess students' understanding of implications of legal requirements depending on business sector, size, and nature of organizations.

{% include excol.html type="end" %}

## Ideas to Assess Knowledge for Module

Optional ideas to support assessment:

* Guided Quiz &mdash; From a list of business case arguments, students describe the benefits that match the corresponding business case arguments. Assess students' capacity to relate business case arguments to benefits.
* Presentation &mdash; Students present business case arguments that are applicable to an organization of their choice. Assess students' capacity to explain the rationale for each argument.
* Open Book Exam &mdash; Students answer questions about the scope and applicability of specific policies from [Web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] Laws & Policies](/policies/). Assess students' capacity to identify how laws and policies impact a particular organization.

## Teaching Resources

Suggested resources to support your teaching:

* [The Business Case for Digital [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]](/business-case/) &mdash; Explains the rationale for organizations to pursue digital [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] for people with disabilities. This includes driving innovation, enhancing brand, extending market reach, and minimizing legal risk. It includes case studies from different organizations.
* [Developing an [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] Business Case for your Organization (Archived)](/business-case/archive/).
* [Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD)](https://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities.html) &mdash; Lists the countries that signed and ratified the convention and optional protocol, and provides news and information on implementation of the convention.
* [Web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] Laws & Policies](/policies/) &mdash; Lists governmental policies related to web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities].
* [Older Users and Web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]: Meeting the Needs of Ageing Web Users](/older-users/) &mdash; Explains the overlapping needs of ageing web users and web users with disabilities, and how [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] addresses both situations. This resource refers to further background materials, including statistics on older people.
* [Web Content [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] and Mobile Web: Making a Website Accessible Both for People with Disabilities and for Mobile Devices (Archived)](/standards-guidelines/wcag-mobile-overlap/) &mdash; Explains some of the shared experiences using the Web for people using mobile devices and people with disabilities (archived content).

{% include excol.html type="all" %}

