---
title: "Module 4: Principles, Standards, and Checks"
permalink: /curricula/introduction-to-web-[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]/principles-standards-and-checks/
ref: /curricula/introduction-to-web-[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]/principles-standards-and-checks/
lang: en
github:
  repository: w3c/wai-curricula
  path: content/1-4.md
license: creative-commons
footer: >
  <p><strong>Date:</strong> First published 3 December 2019 </p>
  <p><strong>Editors:</strong> Daniel Montalvo and <a href="http://www.w3.org/People/shadi/">Shadi Abou-Zahra</a>. Contributors: <a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/EO/EOWG-members">EOWG Participants</a>. </p>
  <p>Developed by the Education and Outreach Working Group (<a href="http://www.w3.org/WAI/EO/">EOWG</a>). Developed with support from the <a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/about/projects/wai-guide/">WAI-Guide Project</a> funded by the European Commission (EC) under the Horizon 2020 program (Grant Agreement 822245).</p>
navigation:
  previous: /curricula/introduction-to-web-[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]/business-case-and-benefits/
  next: /curricula/introduction-to-web-[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]/getting-started-with-[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]/
---

## Introduction
{:.no-display}

Courses based on this module:

* Introduce the [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] principles: Perceivable, Operable, Understandable, and Robust.
* Introduce W3C [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] standards, and their supporting resources.
* Provide hands-on experience checking how web pages have implemented the standards.

## Learning Outcomes for Module

Students should be able to:

* Explain the web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] concepts Perceivable, Operable, Understandable, and Robust (POUR), and give examples of each.
* Define the scope of the W3C [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] standards:
  * Web Content [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] Guidelines (WCAG),
  * Authoring Tools [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] Guidelines (ATAG), 
  * User Agent [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] Guidelines (UAAG), and  
  * Accessible Rich Internet Applications (WAI-ARIA).
* Explain how W3C [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] standards are developed.
* List examples of WCAG adoption in policies internationally.
* Check web pages to identify potential [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] features and barriers and explain how they fit under principle(s) and success criteria.

## Competencies 

Skills required for this module.

Students:

* Basic understanding of:
  * Computers and the Web.
  * [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] concepts and terminology.
  * How people with disabilities use the Web.

Instructors:

* In-depth knowledge of:
  * How people with disabilities use the Web (including assistive technologies and adaptive strategies).
  * The links between components of web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities].
  * [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] principles.  
  * The W3C [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] standards.
  * How to check web pages for [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities].

## Topics to Teach

Optional topics to achieve the learning outcomes.

{% include excol.html type="all" %}

{% include excol.html type="start" %}

### Topic: Principles of Web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]

{% include excol.html type="middle" %}

Introduce the web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] concepts Perceivable, Operable, Understandable, and Robust (POUR). For an explanation of these concepts, see [Understanding the Four Principles of [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/intro#understanding-the-four-principles-of-[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]). For an introduction to some web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] requirements belonging to each principle, refer to [[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] Principles](/fundamentals/[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]-principles/).

Introduce the web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] concepts Perceivable, Operable, Understandable, and Robust (POUR). Refer to [[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] Principles](/fundamentals/[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]-principles/).

#### Learning Outcomes for Topic

Students should be able to:

* Explain the concepts of Perceivable, Operable, Understandable, and Robust as principles of web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities].
* List requirements of each of the principles.

#### Teaching Ideas for Topic

Optional ideas to teach the learning outcomes:

* Explain the web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] concepts: Perceivable information and user interface, Operable user interface and navigation, Understandable information and user interface, and Robust content and reliable interpretation.
* Provide examples of each of the principles.
* Introduce how different design and development roles have responsibility for different parts of each principle.

#### Ideas to Assess Knowledge for Topic

Optional ideas to support assessment:

* Report &mdash; Students write a summary describing the four principles of web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]. Assess students' capacity to provide examples, such as Captions and Other Alternatives for Multimedia under the principle Perceivable.
* Debate &mdash; Students provide and discuss with others further examples of each principle (beyond what is in the W3C "[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] Principles" resource). Assess students' capacity to expand the applicability of the principles.
* Presentation &mdash; Students choose a principle and explain why it is essential for people with disabilities, and how it benefits many people. Assess students' capacity to relate the [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] principles to specific examples of how people with disabilities use the web.

{% include excol.html type="end" %}

{% include excol.html type="start" %}

### Topic: W3C [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] Standards

{% include excol.html type="middle" %}

Introduce the scope of the W3C [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] standards. It includes desktop and mobile websites and applications, authoring tools (like Content Management Systems, CMS), and user agents (like web browsers). Refer to [W3C [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] Standards Overview](/standards-guidelines/).

#### Learning Outcomes for Topic

Students should be able to:

* List the W3C [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] standards: WCAG, ATAG, UAAG, and WAI-ARIA.
* Describe their structure, principles, guidelines, success criteria, and the type of audience and components they address.
* Explain how these standards, web technologies, and [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] components are related.
* Explain the role that consistent standards play in increasing the [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] of the Web for people with disabilities.
* Describe how and why the public approach of standards development involves people with disabilities, industry, public bodies, and other individuals. 

#### Teaching Ideas for Topic

Optional ideas to teach the learning outcomes:

* Explain the overall structure and sections of the standards. Relate them to web technologies and components such as HTML, authoring tools, web browsers, assistive tools, and media players. Refer to [Essential Components of Web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]](/fundamentals/components/).
* Highlight that W3C updates standards periodically. Underline that updates respond to changes in technologies, components, and user needs.
* Refer to the inclusion of W3C [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] standards in different policies and standards internationally.
* Explain that WAI develops these standards following the W3C process, with involvement of people with disabilities, industry, public, and research bodies, and individual experts. Refer to How WAI Develops [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] Standards through the W3C Process:
Milestones and Opportunities to Contribute page, [Community Collaboration section](/standards-guidelines/w3c-process/#community).
* Discuss with students the specific role of each of the standards mentioned and compare them with other relevant technical guidelines (if any). Refer to [Why Standards Harmonization is Essential to Web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]](/standards-guidelines/harmonization/)

#### Ideas to Assess Knowledge for Topic

Optional ideas to support assessment:

* Report &mdash; Students write a short report  about each standard, focusing on their scope and overall structure. Assess students' capacity to elaborate on the web technologies and components these standards address.
* Debate &mdash; From a given set of [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] issues, students discuss and decide which standard and specific section covers each issue. Assess students' capacity to apply knowledge of [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] standards to real [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] issues.
* Presentation &mdash; Students present [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] laws and policies in their region, if any. Students specify if they have been adopted from W3C standards. If not, students give a brief overview of similarities and differences to the W3C [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] standards. Assess students' capacity to identify aspects of [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] standards such as scope, applicability, normative / non-normative sections, etc.
* Portfolio &mdash; Students research if there are further technical guidelines for [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] in a given organization. Students specify if they diverge from W3C [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] standards. Assess student's capacity to outline overall differences and similarities between the chosen guidelines.

{% include excol.html type="end" %}

{% include excol.html type="start" %}

### Topic: Hands-on Experience of Standards

{% include excol.html type="middle" %}

Give students hands-on experience checking how web pages have implemented [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] principles and WCAG standards, or not. Use examples from [Easy Checks - A First Review of Web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]](/test-evaluate/preliminary/).

**NOTE:** In this topic, students can try their knowledge of [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] principles and standards. [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] evaluation is beyond the scope of this module. It requires more skills and [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] knowledge than has been taught so far. 

#### Learning Outcomes for Topic

Students should be able to:

* Identify potential [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] barriers.
* Relate their findings to the relevant WCAG success criteria.

#### Teaching Ideas for Topic

Optional ideas to teach the learning outcomes.

* Introduce students to basic [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] checks. Anyone using the web can perform these checks. Note that the tools listed in Easy Checks are advisable but not required to perform the checks.
* Ask students to check different types of web pages and relate their findings to the [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] principles and standards.

#### Ideas to Assess Knowledge for Topic

Optional ideas to support assessment:

* Guided Quiz &mdash; From a given set of [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] checks, students explain which principle(s) and success criteria they belong to. For example, students select the check Page Titles and attach it to the principle Operable. Assess students' capacity to relate some checks with their corresponding principle(s).
* Practice &mdash; Students choose three [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] checks from [Easy Checks](/test-evaluate/preliminary/). Students try the checks on several web pages and report results. Assess students' capacity to relate the checks to specific groups of users and point to solutions for the problems they found in the analyzed websites.

{% include excol.html type="end" %}

## Ideas to Assess Knowledge for Module

Optional ideas to support assessment:

* Presentation &mdash; Students explain the POUR principles of web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] and refer to specifics. For example, students elaborate on setting the language of a web page, under the principle Understandable.
* Short Answer questions &mdash; From specific examples of [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] features, students identify which principle they belong to and which users it helps. For example, Functionality Available from the Keyboard belongs to the principle Operable and helps keyboard users as well as people using voice recognition software.
* Concept Map &mdash; Students relate the principles of accessible design to web content, authoring tools, and user agents.
* Report &mdash; Students summarize the scope of the W3C [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] standards and explain some of their guidelines and success criteria.
* Practice &mdash; Students carry out basic [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] evaluation.

## Teaching Resources

Suggested resources to support your teaching:

* [[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] Principles](/fundamentals/[(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]-principles/) &mdash; Introduces [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] concepts for websites, web applications, browsers, and other tools.
* [W3C [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] Standards Overview](/standards-guidelines/) &mdash; Introduces standards related to web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] for W3C. Links to: 
* [Essential Components of Web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]](/fundamentals/components/) &mdash; Explains the role and relationships of web browsers, authoring tools, web designers and developers, and more. Helps you understand the ecosystem of web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities], and how several things need to work together. 
* [Web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] Laws and Policies](/policies/) &mdash; Lists governmental policies related to web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] in countries and regions around the world.
* [How WAI Develops [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] Standards through the W3C Process: Milestones and opportunities to Contribute](/standards-guidelines/w3c-process/) &mdash; Provides a simplified overview of the W3C standards development process, and opportunities for everyone to contribute to development of standards and resources.
* [Easy Checks – A First Review of Web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]](/test-evaluate/preliminary/) &mdash; Provides step-by-step guidance and brief explanations for checking some aspects of [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]. These checks are designed to be quick and easy, rather than definitive conformance assessments.
* [Why Standards Harmonization is Essential to Web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities]](/standards-guidelines/harmonization/) &mdash; Explains the need for a common understanding of web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities] internationally, to facilitate the exchange of practices, tools, and skills, thereby accelerating the adoption and implementation of web [(Introduction to Web Accessibility) Roles and Responsibilities].

{% include excol.html type="all" %}
