---
title: "[Draft] Module 2: Navigating Web Interfaces"
permalink: /curricula/developing-accessible-content/navigating-web-interfaces/
ref: /curricula/developing-accessible-content/navigating-web-interfaces/
lang: en
github:
  repository: w3c/wai-curricula
  path: content/2-2.md
license: creative-commons
footer: >
  <p><strong>Date:</strong> $Date</p>
  <p><strong>Editors: </strong>Daniel Montalvo and <a href="http://www.w3.org/People/shadi/">Shadi Abou-Zahra</a>. Contributors: <a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/EO/EOWG-members">EOWG Participants</a>. </p>
  <p>Developed by the Education and Outreach Working Group (<a href="http://www.w3.org/WAI/EO/">EOWG</a>). Developed with support from the <a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/about/projects/wai-guide/">WAI-Guide Project</a> funded by the European Commission (EC) under the Horizon 2020 program (Grant Agreement 822245).</p>
navigation:
  previous: /curricula/developing-accessible-content/essentials-of-accessible-development/
  next: /curricula/developing-accessible-content/images-and-graphics/
---
 
## Introduction
{:.no-display}

Courses based on this module:

* Introduce different navigation components in web pages and applications.
* Explain how to make them accessible.

## Learning Outcomes for Module

Students should be able to:

* Distinguish between different navigation patterns.
* Demonstrate knowledge about making navigational elements accessible.
* Determine if the appropriate elements, roles, and properties are used in each given navigation pattern.
* Analyze if a given navigation pattern meets the following success criteria of WCAG:
  * 2.4.3 (Focus order).
  * 2.4.5 (Multiple ways).
  * 2.4.7 (Focus visible).
  * 2.4.8 (Location).
  * 4.1.2 (Name, Role, Value).

## Competencies

Skills required for this module.

Students:

* Basic understanding of:
  * Accessibility concepts and terminology.
  * How people with disabilities use the Web.
  * HTML elements for grouping content.
  * CSS properties.
  * Scripts for showing and hiding content and for updating DOM object properties.

Instructors:

* In-depth knowledge of:
  * How people with disabilities use the Web (including assistive technologies and adaptive strategies).
  * The links between components of web accessibility.
  * Accessibility principles.  
  * The W3C accessibility standards.
  * Scripts for showing and hiding content and for updating DOM object properties.
* Experience with:
  * HTML elements for grouping content.
  * CSS properties.
  
## Topics to Teach

Optional topics to achieve the learning outcomes.

{% include excol.html type="all" %}

{% include excol.html type="start" %}

### Topic: Patterns for Navigation

{% include excol.html type="middle" %}

Introduce some navigation components such as primary and secondary menus, site maps, and breadcrumb trails. Explain why users benefit from these structures. Mention some strategies to make them accessible.

#### Learning Outcomes for Topic

Students should be able to:

* Distinguish between different types of navigation menus, such as primary or secondary.
* Identify other navigational elements such as toolbars, site maps, and breadcrumb trails.
* Distinguish the appropriate elements, roles, and properties to convey the different parts of a navigational element.

### Teaching Ideas for Topic

Optional ideas to teach the learning outcomes.

* Introduce the concept of navigation menu. Emphasize that there might be one or several of them in a website, and that each of them should be distinguishable. Mention that main navigation menus help users move between the first levels of the structure of the website, and that secondary navigation elements help users move between different sub pages of a given category or section.
* Introduce the roles of nav, list, and listitem. Give examples of their usage and map them to the corresponding native HTML elements carrying these roles.

{% include excol.html type="end" %}

{% include excol.html type="start" %}

### Topic: Structuring and Labeling Navigational Elements

{% include excol.html type="middle" %}

Introduce HTML elements that convey the structure of menus. Present strategies that allow for a consistent identification and labeling of menus, breadcrumb trails, and site maps.

#### Learning Outcomes for Topic

Students should be able to:

* Use the `nav` element to identify the region of the page containing the menu.
* Use the `ul` HTML tag to convey the number of items in a menu.
* Provide adequate labels for each of the menus in a web page by means of a heading element, `aria-label`, or `aria-labelledby` elements.

{% comment %}

#### Teaching Ideas

Optional ideas to teach the learning outcomes.

* Explain that screen reader users take advantage of the nav element to distinguish the menus from other components. Mention that the role list and listitem help users understand how many items the menu contains.
* Emphasize that all menu items must be labeled with a meaningful text that allows users to identify them.

{% endcomment %}

{% include excol.html type="end" %}

{% include excol.html type="start" %}

### Topic: Additional Functionality

{% include excol.html type="middle" %}

Explain some aspects that help make components such as submenus and dropdown menus accessible.

#### Learning Outcomes for Topic

Students should be able to:

* Indicate the hierarchical relationship between a menu item and its submenus using nested lists and list items.
* Provide several ways to access submenu items, such as links in the menu structure or in the first-level page.
* Denote the presence of a submenu via the `aria-haspopup` attribute.
* Indicate expanded or collapsed states of menu items using the `aria-expanded` attribute.

{% include excol.html type="end" %}

{% include excol.html type="all" %}

{% comment %}

## Ideas to Assess Knowledge for Module

Optional ideas to support assessment:

* Practice &mdash; Students create an accessible primary navigation menu. Assess students' capacity to use roles for navigation, lists, and list items appropriately.

{% endcomment %}

## Teaching Resources

Suggested resources to support your teaching:

* [How People with Disabilities Use the Web](/people-use-web/) &mdash; Provides stories of people with disabilities using the Web; describes types of disabilities and some of the barriers that people encounter using the Web; and introduces types of assistive technologies and adaptive strategies that some people use.
* [Web Accessibility Perspectives (videos)](/perspective-videos/) &mdash; Is a series of 1-minute videos that demonstrate that web accessibility is essential for people with disabilities and useful for all. They show accessibility features, how they impact people with disabilities, and how they benefit everyone in a variety of situations.
* [WAI Web Accessibility Tutorials (Menus)](https://www.w3.org/WAI/tutorials/menus/) -- Provides guidance about making navigation components accessible.
* WAI-ARIA Authoring Practices [ARIA can both cloak and enhance](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices#principle-2-aria-can-both-cloak-and-enhance-creating-both-power-and-danger) section &mdash; provides readers with an understanding of how to use WAI-ARIA to create accessible rich internet applications.
* [HTML5 contents for grouping elements](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/grouping-content.html#grouping-content/) -- Presents elements that serve to group content.