---
title: "[Draft] Module 3: Images and Graphics"
permalink: /curricula/developing-accessible-content/images-and-graphics/
ref: /curricula/developing-accessible-content/images-and-graphics/
lang: en
github:
  repository: w3c/wai-curricula
  path: content/2-3.md
license: creative-commons
footer: >
  <p><strong>Date:</strong> $Date</p>
  <p><strong>Editors: </strong>Daniel Montalvo and <a href="http://www.w3.org/People/shadi/">Shadi Abou-Zahra</a>. Contributors: <a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/EO/EOWG-members">EOWG Participants</a>. </p>
  <p>Developed by the Education and Outreach Working Group (<a href="http://www.w3.org/WAI/EO/">EOWG</a>). Developed with support from the <a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/about/projects/wai-guide/">WAI-Guide Project</a> funded by the European Commission (EC) under the Horizon 2020 program (Grant Agreement 822245).</p>
navigation:
  previous: /curricula/developing-accessible-content/navigating-web-interfaces/
  next: /curricula/developing-accessible-content/tables/
---

## Introduction
{:.no-display}

Courses based on this module:

* Introduce different user groups and use cases which benefit from accessible images.
* Present some types of images from an accessibility standpoint.
* Provide strategies to make images accessible.

## Learning Outcomes for Module

Students should be able to:

* Identify how the following user groups access information contained in graphical elements:
  * Screen reader users.
  * Screen magnifier users.
  * Users of speech recognition software.
  * Users with cognitive disabilities.
* Distinguish between informative, decorative, functional, text, and complex images.
* Demonstrate knowledge about providing alternative texts for images.
* Determine if an image needs additional description based on their type and context.
* Analyze if an alternative text and/or description for a given image meets success criterion 1.1.1 (Text Alternatives) of WCAG.

## Competencies

Skills required for this module.

Students:

* Basic understanding of:
  * Accessibility concepts and terminology.
  * How people with disabilities use the Web.
  * HTML `img` element.
  * CSS Transforms and CSS Fonts.
  * SVG concepts.

Instructors:

* In-depth knowledge of:
  * How people with disabilities use the Web (including assistive technologies and adaptive strategies).
  * The links between components of web accessibility.
  * Accessibility principles.  
  * The W3C accessibility standards.
* Experience with:
  * HTML `img` tag and `alt` attribute.
  * CSS Transforms and CSS Fonts.
  * SVG concepts.
  * Assistive technology users strategies to interact with images and graphics.

## Topics to Teach

Optional topics to achieve the learning outcomes.

{% include excol.html type="all" %}

{% include excol.html type="start" %}

### Topic: Images for All

{% include excol.html type="middle" %}

Present some use cases and scenarios which benefit from accessible images.

#### Learning Outcomes for Topic

Students should be able to:

* Recognize how screen reader users access text alternatives for images using specific keystrokes or functions.
* Identify how people using speech input software can focus and interact with images by voicing their text alternative.
* Acknowledge how mobile users can turn off images while they are browsing on their mobile devices under data restrictions.
* Acknowledge the role of alternative texts to help better image indexing and ranking of images.

#### Teaching Ideas for Topic

Optional ideas to teach the learning outcomes:

* Explain how screen reader users can get information about a given image via the text alternative, a description of the image contents in plain text. State that it is not necessary to include the word "image" in the alternative text, since that piece of information would be separately announced when the image role is used appropriately. Indicate that most screen readers have specific keystrokes to navigate between images as well as functions to list all text alternatives of a web page.
* Bring in examples of speech input software and show the necessary steps to jump through the different images of a page.
* Demonstrate how images may not be always available by turning them off. Refer to common extensions or the settings screen in most browsers. Show pages with adequate alternative texts. Compare them with other images containing inaccurate or non-existing alternative texts. Emphasize how essential information is often missed due to the lack of text alternatives.
* Explain that search engines use alternative text among other techniques to better determine what  an image is about. Indicate that the more accurate an alternative text is, the better your images could rank.

#### Ideas to Assess Knowledge for Topic

Optional ideas to support assessment.

* Practice &mdash; Students are shown image buttons or links without text alternative and are asked to provide them. Assess how students provide adequate alternative text for some specific types of images.
* Practice &mdash; Students use a screen reader to navigate through a given set of images that they have not seen before. Assess how students know specific keystrokes and functionality of a screen reader.
* Practice &mdash; Students use speech input software to interact with button or link images. Assess how students use voice commands to activate interactive images.

{% include excol.html type="end" %}

{% include excol.html type="start" %}

### Topic: Including Images in Websites

{% include excol.html type="middle" %}

Introduce different technologies that can be used to make images and graphics accessible based on their type and function.

#### Learning Outcomes for Topic

Students should be able to:

* Distinguish between informative,  functional, text, complex, and decorative images.
* Use the `alt` attribute to provide accessible descriptions for images inserted with the `img` tag or the `image` input type of HTML.
* Use the `alt` attribute, or the `aria-label`, or `aria-labelledby` properties to create accessible SVG graphics.
* Use CSS Transforms and CSS Fonts technologies to style texts with decorative effect instead of using images of text.
* Use MathML language to convey mathematical expressions instead of using images of text.
* Recognize some strategies to provide long descriptions for images such as:
  * `longdesc` attribute.
  * `figure` and `figcaption` elements.
  * `aria-describedby`.
  
#### Teaching Ideas for Topic

Optional ideas to support assessment.

* Introduce the different types of images and provide examples. For reference, see the pages for image types at [Images tutorial](https://www.w3.org/WAI/tutorials/images-and-graphics/).
* Introduce the HTML `alt` attribute. Explain that it should contain concise and clear information about the image. Mention that when an image is decorative, the value for the attribute should be empty ("").
* Introduce CSS Transforms and CSS Fonts technologies. Explain that many visual effects can now be achieved by using these technologies instead of embedding an image file into a website. For reference, see the images of text section of the [Images tutorial](https://www.w3.org/WAI/tutorials/images-and-graphics/).
* Introduce the MathML language to convey mathematical expressions on the Web. Emphasize that screen reader support for MAthML on the Web is growing, but other assistive technology users may need additional browser extensions. For reference, see [Images tutorial (mathematical expressions example)](https://www.w3.org/WAI/tutorials/images-and-graphics/textual/#mathematical-expressions).
* Introduce ways to provide additional descriptions for complex images and groups of images such as `aria-describedby` or `longdesc`. Explain that sometimes concise descriptions are not enough to convey the information.

#### Ideas to Assess Knowledge

Optional ideas to support assessment.

* Guided Quiz &mdash; Students are presented with a set of images in the context of a website and give their type and possible alternative text. Assess how students identify different types of images and provide alternative texts based on their context.
* Practice &mdash; Students use the `alt` attribute to provide alternative texts for a given set of functional images.
* Practice &mdash; Students are presented with a set of images of texts and are asked to use CSS Transforms and CSS Fonts technologies to make them accessible.

{% include excol.html type="end" %}

{% include excol.html type="all" %}

## Teaching Ideas for Topic

Optional ideas to support assessment.

[To be developed]

## Teaching Resources

Suggested resources to support your teaching:

* [How People with Disabilities Use the Web](/people-use-web/) &mdash; Provides stories of people with disabilities using the Web; describes types of disabilities and some of the barriers that people encounter using the Web; and introduces types of assistive technologies and adaptive strategies that some people use.
* [Web Accessibility Perspectives (videos)](/perspective-videos/) &mdash; Is a series of 1-minute videos that demonstrate that web accessibility is essential for people with disabilities and useful for all. They show accessibility features, how they impact people with disabilities, and how they benefit everyone in a variety of situations.
* [WAI Web Accessibility Tutorials (Images)](https://www.w3.org/WAI/tutorials/images) &mdash; shows how to develop web content that is accessible to people with disabilities, and that provides a better user experience for everyone
* WAI-ARIA Authoring Practices [ARIA can both cloak and enhance](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices#principle-2-aria-can-both-cloak-and-enhance-creating-both-power-and-danger) section &mdash; provides readers with an understanding of how to use WAI-ARIA to create accessible rich internet applications. 
* HTML5 Specification's [3.2.1 Semantics](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/dom.html#semantics-2) &mdash;
