---
title: "[Draft] Module 4: Tables"
permalink: /curricula/developing-accessible-content/tables/
ref: /curricula/developing-accessible-content/tables/
lang: en
github:
  repository: w3c/wai-curricula
  path: content/2-4.md
license: creative-commons
footer: >
  <p><strong>Date:</strong> $Date</p>
  <p><strong>Editors: </strong>Daniel Montalvo and <a href="http://www.w3.org/People/shadi/">Shadi Abou-Zahra</a>. Contributors: <a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/EO/EOWG-members">EOWG Participants</a>. </p>
  <p>Developed by the Education and Outreach Working Group (<a href="http://www.w3.org/WAI/EO/">EOWG</a>). Developed with support from the <a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/about/projects/wai-guide/">WAI-Guide Project</a> funded by the European Commission (EC) under the Horizon 2020 program (Grant Agreement 822245).</p>
navigation:
  previous: /curricula/developing-accessible-content/images-and-graphics/
  next: /curricula/developing-accessible-content/forms/
---

## Introduction
{:.no-display}

Courses based on this module:

* Introduce how several groups of users interact with accessible tables.
* Introduce some code-based solutions to associate header and data cells and to provide titles and descriptions for tables.

## Learning Outcomes for Module

Students should be able to:

* Recognize various strategies for users to navigate and understand information presented in tables.
* Distinguish between simple and complex tables.
* Mark header cells and data cells using the `th` and `td` elements respectively.
* Associate data cells with header cells in complex tables via thee `headers` attribute.
* Provide meaningful names and descriptions for tables by means of the `caption` and `summary` elements.
* Determine if a given table meets success criterion 1.3.1 Info and Relationships of WCAG.

## Competencies

Skills required for this module.

Students:

* Basic understanding of:
  * Accessibility concepts and terminology.
  * How people with disabilities use the Web.
  * HTML elements for grouping content.

Instructors:

* In-depth knowledge of:
  * How people with disabilities use the Web (including assistive technologies and adaptive strategies).
  * The links between components of web accessibility.
  * Accessibility principles.  
  * The W3C accessibility standards.
* Experience with:
  * HTML elements for grouping content.
  * `Caption` and `Summary` elements.

## Topics to Teach

Optional topics to achieve the learning outcomes.

{% include excol.html type="all" %}

{% include excol.html type="start" %}

### Topic: Navigating Tabular Information

{% include excol.html type="middle" %}

Introduce strategies that some people use to navigate tables. Mention that there might be different ways in which information in a table can be presented depending on user requirements.

#### Learning Outcomes for Topic

Students should be able to:

* Recognize the ability of screen reader users to review one cell at a time using specific key combinations.
* Recognize how header cells are spoken before or after data cells by screen readers as users move between cells.
* Acknowledge that some people may use custom stylesheets or different screen sizes to display table data in an alternative format.

#### Teaching Ideas for Topic

Optional ideas to teach the learning outcomes:

* Introduce how screen reader users take advantage of specific key combinations of their screen reader to move through the different cells of a table. Emphasize that information on the data cells is associated with that of the header cells and both are spoken sequentially.
* Explain that information on the data cells is spoken before or after that on the header cell depending on the screen reader. Mention that column headers are spoken when moving to the next or prior column, and row headers are spoken when moving to the next or prior row.
* Explain how some users use custom stylesheets to enlarge part or all of the table contents. Emphasize that this might cause the table to render as a list instead. Provide examples of these alternative renderings.

#### Ideas to Assess Knowledge for Topic

Optional ideas to support assessment.

* Research &mdash; Students research screen readers' documentation to find the keystrokes allowing to move through the different table cells. Assess students understanding of screen readers' documentation.
* Practice &mdash; Students navigate an accessible table using their screen reader of choice and without looking at the table. Assess how students identify header and data cells as they are spoken by the screen reader.
* Practice &mdash; Students are presented with a table and are asked to break it down into several nested lists. Assess how students communicate the underlying structure of the table regardless of its visual appearance.

{% include excol.html type="end" %}

{% include excol.html type="start" %}

### Topic: Associating Information

{% include excol.html type="middle" %}

Provide information about techniques to associate header and data cells within tables.

#### Learning Outcomes for Topic

Students should be able to:

* Distinguish between simple and complex tables.
* Use the `th` and `td` elements to denote headers and data cells.
* Use the `scope` attribute to clarify the direction of the headers.
* Use the `headers` attribute to define custom headers for cells in complex tables with irregular headers.

#### Teaching Ideas for Topic

Optional ideas to teach the learning outcomes.

* Explain the difference between simple and complex tables. Indicate that simple tables have one column or row header, whereas complex tables have more than one column or row header.
* Introduce the `th` and `td` elements. Explain that `th` elements are used to denote header cells, whereas `td` elements are used to denote data cells.
* Introduce the `scope` attribute and its values (`row` and `column`) to indicate the direction of the headers.
* Introduce the `headers` attribute of a data cell to handle irregular headers. Explain that when this attribute is used, each of the header cells need to have a unique id reference. The ids of the corresponding header cells need to be separated by spaces in the value of the `headers` attribute.

#### Ideas to Assess Knowledge for Topic

Optional ideas to support assessment.

* Practice &mdash; Students are presented with a table with neither visual nor programmatic header indicators. Then they are asked to figure them out and decide if the table could be considered simple or complex. Assess how students distinguish between simple and complex tables.
* Practice &mdash; Students are presented with a simple table and are asked to identify its header cells and provide them with the corresponding `th` elements. Assess how students use the `th` elements in a table.
* Practice &mdash; Students are presented with a table containing several column or row headers and are asked to code them appropriately. Assess how students use the `th` and `scope` elements to indicate table header cells and convey their direction.
* Practice &mdash; Students are presented with an irregular table and are asked to provide its headings. Assess how students use the `headers` attribute in data cells together with its corresponding id references in the table headers.

{% include excol.html type="end" %}

{% include excol.html type="start" %}

#### Topic: Contextual Information for Tables

{% include excol.html type="middle" %}

Introduce techniques to provide information about the purpose of the table. Mention additional techniques to explain structure and layout for complex tables.

#### Learning Outcomes for Topic

Students should be able to:

* Use the `caption` element to describe the purpose and function of the table.
* Use one of the following elements to provide additional information that helps users understand the structure and layout of the table:
  * The `aria-labelledby` and `aria-describedby` attributes.
  * The `figure` and `figcaption` elements.
  * The `summary` element.

### Teaching Ideas for Topic

Optional ideas to teach the learning outcomes:

* Introduce the `caption` element. Explain that it can be used to provide descriptions for the purpose of the table. Mention that it needs to be the first child of the `table` element and that its contents are visible for all users by default.
* Introduce additional methods to provide further detail about the structure and contents of the table. For example, the `figure` and `figcaption` elements, and the `aria-labelledby` and `aria-describedby` attributes. Explain that the `table` element needs to be wrapped by the `figure` element, and that the `figcaption` containing the text needs to be the first child of the `figure` element.
* Explain that the `summary` element was designed to provide screen reader users with detailed information about the structure of complex tables. Emphasize that it is not part of the HTML5 specification, thus its use is not advisable.

#### Ideas to Assess Knowledge for Topic

Optional ideas to support assessment.

* Practice &mdash; Students are presented with a table and are asked to provide mechanisms for authors to add a short text to describe its purpose. Assess students' understanding of the `caption` element to add such texts.
* Practice &mdash; Students are presented with a complex table and are asked to include mechanisms for authors to provide extended details about its contents and overall structure. Assess students' knowledge of the above-mentioned methods to provide additional descriptions for tables.

{% include excol.html type="end" %}

{% include excol.html type="all" %}
 
## Ideas to Assess Knowledge for Module

Optional ideas to support assessment.

[to be developed]

## Teaching Resources

Suggested resources to support your teaching:

* [How People with Disabilities Use the Web](/people-use-web/) &mdash; Provides stories of people with disabilities using the Web; describes types of disabilities and some of the barriers that people encounter using the Web; and introduces types of assistive technologies and adaptive strategies that some people use.
* [Web Accessibility Perspectives (videos)](/perspective-videos/) &mdash; Is a series of 1-minute videos that demonstrate that web accessibility is essential for people with disabilities and useful for all. They show accessibility features, how they impact people with disabilities, and how they benefit everyone in a variety of situations.
* [WAI Web Accessibility Tutorials (Tables)](https://www.w3.org/WAI/tutorials/tables) &mdash; shows how to develop web content that is accessible to people with disabilities, and that provides a better user experience for everyone
* WAI-ARIA Authoring Practices [ARIA can both cloak and enhance](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices#principle-2-aria-can-both-cloak-and-enhance-creating-both-power-and-danger) section &mdash; provides readers with an understanding of how to use WAI-ARIA to create accessible rich internet applications. 
* HTML5 Specification's [3.2.1 Semantics](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/dom.html#semantics-2) &mdash; 