---
title: "[Draft] Module 5: Forms"
permalink: /curricula/developing-accessible-content/forms/
ref: /curricula/developing-accessible-content/forms/
lang: en
github:
  repository: w3c/wai-curricula
  path: content/2-5.md
license: creative-commons
footer: >
  <p><strong>Date:</strong> $Date</p>
  <p><strong>Editors: </strong>Daniel Montalvo and <a href="http://www.w3.org/People/shadi/">Shadi Abou-Zahra</a>. Contributors: <a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/EO/EOWG-members">EOWG Participants</a>. </p>
  <p>Developed by the Education and Outreach Working Group (<a href="http://www.w3.org/WAI/EO/">EOWG</a>). Developed with support from the <a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/about/projects/wai-guide/">WAI-Guide Project</a> funded by the European Commission (EC) under the Horizon 2020 program (Grant Agreement 822245).</p>
navigation:
  previous: /curricula/developing-accessible-content/tables/
  next: /curricula/developing-accessible-content/widgets/
---

## Introduction
{:.no-display}

Courses based on this module:a

* Introduce how to identify form field elements.
* Provide strategies to include instructions for users to complete form fields in the expected way.

## Learning Outcomes for Module

Students should be able to:

* Recognize how some users navigate, fill in, and perceive information from form fields.
* Label controls appropriately so that they can be identified by users and ATs.
* Group controls when they are related to each other.
* Provide instructions so that users know how to complete the form.
* Notify users of any errors or successes during form completion.
* Analyze if a given form meets the following success criteria from WCAG:
  * 1.3.1 (Info and Relationships)
  * 2.4.6 (Headings and Labels)
  * 3.3.2 (Labels or Instructions)
  * 4.1.2 (Name, Rol, and Value).

## Competencies

Skills required for this module.

Students:

* Basic understanding of:
  * Accessibility concepts and terminology.
  * How people with disabilities use the Web.
* Experience with:
  * HTML `input` elements.
  * WAI-ARIA live regions.
  * CSS properties.
  * ECMA Script programming language.

Instructors:

* In-depth knowledge of:
  * How people with disabilities use the Web (including assistive technologies and adaptive strategies).
  * The links between components of web accessibility.
  * Accessibility principles.  
  * The W3C accessibility standards.
* Experience with:
  * HTML`input` elements.
  * CSS properties.
  * ECMAScript programming language.

## Topics to Teach

Optional topics to achieve the learning outcomes.

{% include excol.html type="all" %}

{% include excol.html type="start" %}

### Topic: Interacting with Forms

{% include excol.html type="middle" %}

Introduce several strategies for some user groups to navigate, understand, and fill in form fields.

#### Learning Outcomes for Topic

Students should be able to:

* Recognize that keyboard users navigate through form fields using the tab key.
* Acknowledge that screen reader users only perceive information attached to focusable elements as they navigate using the so-called forms mode.
* Recognize that users with low vision or with mobility impairments need larger targets to interact with form fields.
* Acknowledge that users with cognitive disabilities rely on consistent identification and instructions to understand the form fields' purpose.

{% include excol.html type="end" %}

{% include excol.html type="start" %}

### Topic: Identifying Form Fields

{% include excol.html type="middle" %}

Present strategies to label form controls and make them understandable.

#### Learning Outcomes for Topic

Students should be able to:

* Use the `label` element to provide form fields with a meaningful label.
* Use the `for` attribute to programmatically associate labels with input fields.
* Use the `fieldset` and `legend` elements to associate several form fields together that share the same purpose.
* Demonstrate knowledge about other methods to provide additional instructions within labels, such as the `title`, `aria-label`, `aria-labelledby`, and `aria-describedby` attributes.

{% include excol.html type="end" %}

{% include excol.html type="start" %}

### Topic: Validating User Input

{% include excol.html type="middle" %}

Present several HTML5 input types and additional techniques that help users introduce information in the expected type an format.

#### Learning Outcomes for Topic

Students should be able to:

* Use the `required` attribute to denote that a form field cannot be left empty.
* Use several HTML5 input types that allow validation for specific types of data, such as `date`, `time`,`url`, or `email`.
* Use the `pattern` attribute to validate common regular expressions.

{% include excol.html type="end" %}

{% include excol.html type="start" %}

### Topic: Notifying Users

{% include excol.html type="middle" %}

Introduce strategies to inform users about successes, errors, or any other warning messages resulting from their input or from a time limit.

#### Learning Outcomes for Topic

Students should be able to:

* Notify users of existing time limits, and provide mechanisms to stop or extend them.
* Provide information about the amount of errors in the main heading of the page, the page title, or via modal dialogs.
* Use headings, lists, and anchors to identify error messages with their corresponding form controls.
* Provide inline feedback through messages belonging to specific form controls via labels, icons, or the `aria-describedby` attribute.
* Use `aria-live` regions to provide instant feedback as the user is typing in a form field.

{% include excol.html type="end" %}

## Teaching Resources

Suggested resources to support your teaching:

* [How People with Disabilities Use the Web](/people-use-web/) &mdash; Provides stories of people with disabilities using the Web; describes types of disabilities and some of the barriers that people encounter using the Web; and introduces types of assistive technologies and adaptive strategies that some people use.
* [Web Accessibility Perspectives (videos)](/perspective-videos/) &mdash; Is a series of 1-minute videos that demonstrate that web accessibility is essential for people with disabilities and useful for all. They show accessibility features, how they impact people with disabilities, and how they benefit everyone in a variety of situations.
* [WAI Web Accessibility Tutorials (Forms)](https://www.w3.org/WAI/tutorials/forms) &mdash; shows how to develop web content that is accessible to people with disabilities, and that provides a better user experience for everyone
* WAI-ARIA Authoring Practices [ARIA can both cloak and enhance](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices#principle-2-aria-can-both-cloak-and-enhance-creating-both-power-and-danger) section &mdash; provides readers with an understanding of how to use WAI-ARIA to create accessible rich internet applications. 
* HTML5 Specification's [3.2.1 Semantics](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/dom.html#semantics-2) &mdash; 