---
title: "[Draft] Module 6: Widgets"
permalink: /curricula/developing-accessible-content/widgets/
ref: /curricula/developing-accessible-content/widgets/
lang: en
github:
  repository: w3c/wai-curricula
  path: content/2-6.md
license: creative-commons
footer: >
  <p><strong>Date:</strong> $Date</p>
  <p><strong>Editors: </strong>Daniel Montalvo and <a href="http://www.w3.org/People/shadi/">Shadi Abou-Zahra</a>. Contributors: <a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/EO/EOWG-members">EOWG Participants</a>. </p>
  <p>Developed by the Education and Outreach Working Group (<a href="http://www.w3.org/WAI/EO/">EOWG</a>). Developed with support from the <a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/about/projects/wai-guide/">WAI-Guide Project</a> funded by the European Commission (EC) under the Horizon 2020 program (Grant Agreement 822245).</p>
navigation:
  previous: /curricula/developing-accessible-content/forms/
---

## Introduction
{:.no-display}

Courses based on this module:

* Introduce additional WAI-ARIA roles, states, and properties that help create common accessible rich internet applications.
* Delve into keyboard conventions and focus management techniques that help make complex user interfaces accessible.

## Learning Outcomes for Module

Students should be able to:

* Understand how users interact with complex widgets.
* Identify commonly used designed patterns in web applications.
* Communicate accessibility properties of widgets built with non-standard HTML conventions.
* Add and remove focus from elements.
* Add visible cues to indicate current focus position.
* Communicate dynamic changes in web applications.

## Competencies

Skills required for this module.

Students:
 
* Basic understanding of:
  * Accessibility concepts and terminology.
  * How people with disabilities use the Web.
* Experience with:
  * HTML elements, tags, and attributes.
  * WAI-ARIA live regions.
  * CSS properties.
  * Scripts to dynamically update content and manage focus status.

Instructors:

* In-depth knowledge of:
  * How people with disabilities use the Web (including assistive technologies and adaptive strategies).
  * The links between components of web accessibility.
  * Accessibility principles.  
  * The W3C accessibility standards.
* Experience with:
  * HTML specification.
  * DOM specification.
  * CSS specification.
  * WAI-ARIA specification.
  * Scripts to dynamically update content and manage focus status.

## Topics to Teach

Optional topics to achieve the learning outcomes.

{% include excol.html type="all" %}

{% include excol.html type="start" %}

#### Topic: WAI-ARIA Specification

{% include excol.html type="middle" %}

Introduce the WAI-Aria specification. Explain its different parts and present some scenarios for its usage.

#### Learning Outcomes for Topic

Students should be able to:

* Define the scope and purpose of the WAI-ARIA specification.
* IDentify some of its roles, as well as categories of roles.
* Identify WAI-ARIA states and properties.

#### Teaching Ideas for Topic

Optional ideas to teach the learning outcomes:

* Define WAI-Aria as a set of roles, states, properties, and values to improve the accessibility of web content and applications. Emphasize that it complements, and not substitutes, existing semantics of host languages where it is used.
* Introduce different types of roles. For example, landmarks, widget, document structure, or window roles.
* Introduce some supported states and properties of WAI-ARIA. Explain that state values are more likely to change due to user interaction, whereas property values are meant to last through the application life-cycle.

{% include excol.html type="end" %}

{% include excol.html type="start" %}

### Topic: Programmatic Focus

{% include excol.html type="middle" %}

Explain some techniques to remove or add focus to elements that are not focusable by default. Emphasize that focus management is essential for keyboard and screen reader users to interact with non-standard widgets.

#### Learning Outcomes for Topic

Students should be able to:

* Add or remove focus from an element that is not focusable by default with scripts updating the `tabindex` attribute.
* Add event listeners to a component that is not focusable by default to allow for multiple ways of interaction.

### Teaching Ideas for Topic

Optional ideas to teach the learning outcomes.

* Introduce the `tabindex` attribute. Explain that it indicates if an element can or cannot be focusable. 
* Introduce the value `-1` for the `tabindex` attribute. Explain that it serves to mark an element so that it can be focusable when it becomes  visible  or available via scripts.
* Introduce the value `0` for the `tabindex` attribute. Explain that it makes an element focusable and it puts it in the relative order of the navigation according to the DOM structure.
* Introduce event listeners that allow for several ways of interaction. For example, keyboard, mouse, and tactile gestures. Emphasize that, in addition to making an element focusable, it is also necessary to take care of all additional functionality. For example, press, select, drag, drop.

{% include excol.html type="end" %}

{% include excol.html type="start" %}

### Topic: Visual Focus 

{% include excol.html type="middle" %}

Explain how to make `focused` state visible and distinguishable from other states.

#### Learning Outcomes

Students should be able to: 

* Use the `:focus` selector to style non-standard focusable elements.
* Visually and programmatically distinguish the `focused` state from other states. 

#### Teaching Ideas

Optional ideas to teach the learning outcomes.

* Remember the `:focus` selector (introduced in previous modules)  and explain that it is necessary to indicate visual focus also for custom widgets.
* Introduce other states that a component may have. For example, `selected`, `pressed`, `expanded`, or `collapse`. Explain that they need to be conveyed both visually and programmatically using WAI-ARIA and clearly distinguishable styles.

{% include excol.html type="end" %}

## Teaching Resources

Suggested resources to support your teaching:

* [How People with Disabilities Use the Web](/people-use-web/) &mdash; Provides stories of people with disabilities using the Web; describes types of disabilities and some of the barriers that people encounter using the Web; and introduces types of assistive technologies and adaptive strategies that some people use.
* [Web Accessibility Perspectives (videos)](/perspective-videos/) &mdash; Is a series of 1-minute videos that demonstrate that web accessibility is essential for people with disabilities and useful for all. They show accessibility features, how they impact people with disabilities, and how they benefit everyone in a variety of situations.
* [WAI-ARIA Authoring Practices 1.1](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices/) -- Provides readers with an understanding of how to use WAI-ARIA 1.1 to create accessible rich internet applications.
* [WAI Web Accessibility Tutorials](https://www.w3.org/WAI/tutorials/) &mdash; shows how to develop web content that is accessible to people with disabilities, and that provides a better user experience for everyone
