---
title: "[Draft] Module 7: Rich Applications"
permalink: /curricula/developer-modules/rich-applications/
ref: /curricula/developer-modules/rich-applications/
lang: en
github:
  repository: w3c/wai-curricula
  path: content/2-7.md
license: creative-commons
acknowledgements: /curricula/acknowledgements/
footer: >
  <p><strong>Date:</strong> $Date</p>
  <p><strong>Editors:</strong> Daniel Montalvo and <a href="http://www.w3.org/People/shadi/">Shadi Abou-Zahra</a>. Contributors: <a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/EO/EOWG-members">EOWG Participants</a>. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS lists contributors and credits.</p>
  <p>Developed by the Education and Outreach Working Group (<a href="http://www.w3.org/WAI/EO/">EOWG</a>). Developed with support from the <a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/about/projects/wai-guide/">WAI-Guide Project</a> funded by the European Commission (EC) under the Horizon 2020 program (Grant Agreement 822245).</p>
navigation:
  previous: /curricula/developer-modules/custom-widgets/
---

## Introduction
{:.no-display}

Courses based on this module should:

* demonstrate how people with disabilities use structures navigate, operate, and interact with rich applications, including Single Page Applications (SPA) and others generated by JavaScript
* explain coding techniques to provide rich applications with appropriate structures and relationships, keyboard and focus interactions, and concurrent notifications

## Learning Outcomes for Module

Students should be able to:

* explain how appropriate structures and relationships, keyboard and focus interactions, and concurrent notifications enable people with disabilities to navigate, operate, and interact with rich applications
* explain how assistive technologies communicate generated content changes, such as change of screens in Single Page Applications (SPA), as opposed to page reloads
* code coherent overall structure and relationships across rich application widgets that are perceived by people with disabilities
* code coherent reading and keyboard focus order to navigate within rich applications using different types of input devices
* code prioritization of notifications and updates that allow people with disabilities to check them at their pace and convenience
* recite related requirements for content authors and designers to ensure applications are operable and understandable

## Competencies

Skills required for this module:

{% include excol.html type="all" %}

{% include excol.html type="start" %}

### Students

{% include excol.html type="middle" %}

* [Prerequisites for Students](/curricula/developer-modules/#prerequisites-for-students)
* Prior [Developer Modules](/curricula/developer-modules/)
* Knowledge of [HTML5 living standard](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/)

{% include excol.html type="end" %}

{% include excol.html type="start" %}

### Instructors

{% include excol.html type="middle" %}

* Applied expertise in teaching:
  * [WCAG 2 Success Criterion 1.3.1 Info and Relationships](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/quickref/#info-and-relationships)
  * [WCAG 2 Success Criterion 1.3.2 Meaningful Sequence](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/quickref/#meaningful-sequence)
  * [WCAG 2 Success Criterion 2.1.1 Keyboard](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/quickref/#keyboard)
  * [WCAG 2 Success Criterion 1.4.13 Content on Hover or Focus](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/quickref/#content-on-hover-or-focus)
  * [WCAG 2 Success Criterion 2.2.2 Pause, Stop, Hide](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/quickref/#pause-stop-hide)
  * [WCAG 2 Success Criterion 2.4.2 Page Titled](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/quickref/#page-titled)
  * [WCAG 2 Success Criterion 2.4.6 Headings and Labels](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/quickref/#headings-and-labels)
  * [WCAG 2 Success Criterion 2.4.10 Section Headings](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/quickref/#section-headings)
  * [WCAG 2 Success Criterion 2.5.1 Pointer Gestures](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/quickref/#pointer-gestures)
  * [WCAG 2 Success Criterion 3.2.1 On Focus](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/quickref/#on-focus)
  * [WCAG 2 Success Criterion 4.1.1 Parsing](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/quickref/#parsing)
  * [WCAG 2 Success Criterion 4.1.2 Name, Role, Value](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/quickref/#name-role-value)
  * [WCAG 2 Success Criterion 4.1.3 Status Messages](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/quickref/#status-messages)
  * [HTML5 Living Standard](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/)
  * [DOM Living Standard](https://dom.spec.whatwg.org/)
  * [WAI-ARIA specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria/)
  * [WAI-ARIA Authoring Practices 1.1](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices/)
* In-depth knowledge of:
  * [Prerequisites for Students](/curricula/developer-modules/#prerequisites-for-students)
  * Prior [Developer Modules](/curricula/developer-modules/)

{% include excol.html type="end" %}

## Topics to Teach

Topics to support the teaching sequence:

{% include excol.html type="start" %}

### Topic: Structure and Relationships

{% include excol.html type="middle" %}

Refer back to [Module 1: Structure and Semantics](/curricula/developer-modules/structure-and-semantics/) and explain the importance of proper structures and semantics within applications just as within less dynamic web pages. Demonstrate how assistive technologies rely on clearly identifiable sections and regions, which may each be individual widgets. Explain how content that is dynamically generated, for example through JavaScript, needs to be properly reflected in the DOM.

#### Learning Outcomes for Topic

Students should be able to:

* explain how structures and semantics enable people with disabilities to orient themselves and navigate within applications
* code applications and dynamically generated content with appropriate mark up structures and semantics, including:
  * sections, regions, and corresponding identifiers for these
  * sections of content, such as lists, paragraphs, and tables
  * widgets, including menu bars, form controls, and custom widgets
* identify and mark up any relationships between different sections of content within the application, for example groups of widgets that share the same purpose
* ensure that the order of content within the application follows a meaningful sequence in the DOM and visually, also when content is added, removed, hidden, and displayed
* ensure recognizable and consistent naming of widgets, including widget states, in particular when they appear multiple times within an application
* describe the impact of large amounts of code on assistive technologies and older computer technologies that some people with disabilities may be using
* recite related requirements for content authors and designers to provide clear layout and designs that support different viewport sizes

#### Teaching Ideas for Topic

Optional ideas to teach the learning outcomes:

* Demonstrate navigation between several widgets in an application using assistive technologies, such as text-to-speech and voice interaction. Explain how these components show or hide depending on user action. For example, when the user goes to the menu bar, another application widget may be hidden or greyed out. Emphasize that these states need to be programmatically marked up by updating, adding, or removing the corresponding elements from the DOM.
* Demonstrate the use of voice commands, keystrokes, or gestures provided by speech and mainstream technologies to query for applications titles, headings, or regions. Explain that such elements need to be updated using DOM management techniques to reflect the current state of the application, such as when a new view has been selected.
* Demonstrate overall interaction with rich applications using assistive technologies. Compare examples where assistive technologies communicate the elements that are displayed with other examples where assistive technologies may access information that is not currently on screen. Emphasize that document object model layers should be added and removed depending on the application view, so that assistive technologies only access the ones that are visible.
* Demonstrate the use of `aria-hidden` to hide widgets in an application that are not relevant at a given state from assistive technologies. The `true` value indicates that the component is not currently displayed, and the `false` value indicates that the component is currently visible. Explain that `aria-hidden` removes each component from the accessibility tree and all its descendants, so it must be used with caution as the elements to which it is applied are completely inaccessible for assistive technologies.

#### Ideas to Assess Knowledge for Topic

Optional ideas to support assessment:

* Practical &mdash; Students are presented with a rich application containing different views and are asked to code mechanisms to update titles,  headings, and regions depending on the currently visible section. Assess students' knowledge of how to code updates for application structural components.
* Practical &mdash; Students are presented with a rich application containing different views that show and hide based on user interaction and are asked to update the DOM structure accordingly. Assess students' knowledge of how to provide a coherent DOM structure depending on the  displayed application widgets.
* Practical &mdash; Students are presented with different application views and are asked to code their `displayed` or `hidden` states using `aria-hidden` together with its corresponding value. Assess students' knowledge of how to code `displayed` and `hidden` states of application views.

{% include excol.html type="end" %}

{% include excol.html type="start" %}

### Topic: Keyboard and Focus Interactions

{% include excol.html type="middle" %}

Build on the [Topic Keyboard and Focus Management in Module 6](/curricula/custom-widgets/#topic-keyboard-and-focus-management) to extend the concept to entire applications with multiple widgets. Demonstrate the importance of consistent keyboard commands and predictable behavior across the entire application. Explain how change of screens in Singe Page Applications (SPA) and modal dialogs require particular focus management.

#### Learning Outcomes for Topic

Students should be able to:

* explain how people with different types of disabilities interact with widgets, including keyboard only and voice interaction users, and how keyboard commands, including tab, arrow, and shortcut keys, are used to operate widgets
* explain how people with different types of disabilities rely on focus indicators that are provided in the code and visually
* code applications so that they can be operated via keyboard only and other input devices, such as voice interaction
* ensure consistent use of keyboard commands, including tab, arrow, and shortcut keys, across the entire application
* ensure that navigating through different parts of the application does not initiate change of context without prior notics
* code Single Page Applications (SPA) so that the focus is placed at the beginning of the content when new screens are generated, to replicate the behavior of page reloads for assistive technologies
* code modal dialogs so that the focus is placed at the beginning of the dialog and confined to the dialog until it is closed, and that the focus is returned to the appropriate place in the main content after the dialog is closed
* identify when changes in applications, such as adding, removing, and updating content, impact the current focus or sequence of content, and code mechanisms to restore appropriate focus and meaningful sequence when such changes occur
* recite related requirements for content authors and designers to provide distinguishable styles for focus indicators

#### Teaching Ideas for Topic

Optional ideas to teach the learning outcomes:

* Explain that the tab sequence needs to be preserved so that keyboard users can navigate across the different widgets and content areas of applications, such as different toolbars and menus. Emphasize that native HTML elements are recommended regardless of the nature of the application in use, as they inherit all the necessary semantic properties that make them usable with the keyboard.
* Demonstrate use of common shortcut keys for rich applications, such as to create a new message in a web-based email client or to move to the menu bar in a web-based word processor. Explain that these shortcut keys should avoid any conflict with key combinations of both browsers and assistive technologies. Emphasize that application functionality should rely as much as possible on standard keyboard conventions and on expected navigational mechanisms, as non-standard keyboard shortcuts may sometimes be difficult to remember for some users or impossible to use due to their specific configurations.
* Demonstrate assistive technology interaction with rich applications such as Single Page Applications (SPA). Explain that assistive technologies may not perceive content changes by default unless there is a page reload. Emphasize that each time the view changes, a message indicating the currently selected view should be provided to assistive technologies via a live region.
* Explain techniques to set focus to the most relevant place in an application, such as a newly loaded screen, the default button in a dialog, or the control that originated a modal dialog. Mention that setting focus to the most relevant place in a rich application is a shared responsibility among different team members: designers and developers.
* Demonstrate the use of mechanisms to obtain information about the available keyboard shortcuts in rich applications, such as web-based email clients, spreadsheets, and word processors. Explain that when an application makes extensive use of non-standard keyboard shortcuts, a mechanism that allows users to obtain information about these shortcuts is necessary. Mention that providing such messages is a shared responsibility among different team members: designers and developers.
* Demonstrate accessible and inaccessible modal dialogs. Emphasize how focus remains within the boundaries of the dialogs when they have been coded appropriately. Explain that specific focus treatment should be applied to the contents that are not part of the modal dialog as long as it is displayed so that they are not reachable using the keyboard

#### Ideas to Assess Knowledge for Topic

Optional ideas to support assessment:

* Practical &mdash; Students are presented with a Single Page Application (SPA) with several screens that show or hide based on user interaction. The students are asked to set focus to the specific displayed widget. Assess students' knowledge of how to place focus on a specific application widget based on its state or relevance.
* Practical &mdash; Students are presented with an application that makes extensive use of non-standard keyboard shortcuts and are asked to code a help widget that explains such keyboard shortcuts. Assess students' knowledge of how to provide specific help based on the implemented application keyboard shortcuts.
* Practical &mdash; Students are presented with an application containing modal dialogs and are asked to set focus to the most relevant place based on user interaction. Assess students' knowledge of how to set focus to the dialog when it appears and to the element that originated it when it disappears.

{% include excol.html type="end" %}

{% include excol.html type="start" %}

### Topic: Concurrent Notifications

{% include excol.html type="middle" %}

Build on the [Topic: Notifications in Module 5](/curricula/developer-modules/forms-and-controls/#topic-notifications) to extend the concept to entire applications with multiple widgets. Explain how notifications from different parts of the application need to be queued and prioritized to avoid overloading and confusing users. Demonstrate how unobtrusive and coordinated notifications benefit people using different types of assistive technologies.

#### Learning Outcomes for Topic

Students should be able to:

* explain how multiple concurrent notifcations could occur in applications and describe ways prioritize such notifications
* identify and code the appropriate values `polite`, `assertive`, and `off` for WAI-ARIA `aria-live` regions across entire applications
* identify and mark up relevant updates using the WAI-ARIA attribute `aria-relevant` with the values `additions`, `removals`, and `all`
* identify and code status messages that may not originate from any particular widget or part of the application
* code alerts using WAI-ARIA `role="alert"` and identify situations in which it is appropriate to interrupt users
* code mechanisms to switch notifications on or off to avoid conflicts with assistive technologies presenting several notifications at the same time
* recite related requirements for content authors and designers to provide clear and consise notifications

#### Teaching Ideas for Topic

Optional ideas to teach the learning outcomes:

* Demonstrate interaction to request new data from applications, such as asking for new emails or opening a spreadsheet from a list of most recent items. Explain that these data exchanges could be skipped by users of assistive technologies if they are not marked up correctly. Emphasize that live regions to indicate that new data is being loaded or that there is a waiting time should be provided so that users are aware of what is going on.
* Compare accessible and inaccessible examples of applications modal dialogs that warn about critical errors or data losses, such as when the user wants to quit without saving changes in a word processor or when a user wants to delete information. Explain that, when these messages are populated, these should be given high priority in the list of the live regions so that users can take action to avoid data loss or to solve the problem.

#### Ideas to Assess Knowledge for Topic

Optional ideas to support assessment:

* Practical &mdash; Students are asked to code an alert to prevent users from quitting a word processor without saving changes. Assess students' knowledge of how to use assertive live regions to provide such alerts.
* Practical &mdash; Students are asked to provide a message indicating the view that is currently displayed. Assess students' knowledge of how to use polite live regions to provide individual notifications based on the currently selected application view

{% include excol.html type="end" %}

## Ideas to Assess Knowledge for Module

* Practical &mdash; Students are guided to use different mechanisms that assistive technologies provide to navigate within rich applications, such as move through headings, regions, and interact with updates and notifications. Assess students’ knowledge of mechanisms of assistive technologies to interact and operate rich applications.
* Portfolio &mdash; Students build an accessible single page application. Assess students' knowledge of how to communicate structural elements state changes, keyboard and focus interactions, notifications, and updates to assistive technologies.

## Teaching Resources

Suggested resources to support your teaching:

* [WAI-ARIA Authoring Practices 1.1](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices/) &mdash; Provides readers with an understanding of how to use WAI-ARIA 1.1 to create accessible rich internet applications.
* [How People with Disabilities Use the Web](/people-use-web/) &mdash; Provides stories of people with disabilities using the Web; describes types of disabilities and some of the barriers that people encounter using the Web; and introduces types of assistive technologies and adaptive strategies that some people use.
* [WCAG](https://www.w3.org/WAI/standards-guidelines/wcag/) &mdash; Address accessibility of web content on desktops, laptops, tablets, and mobile devices.
* [WAI ARIA](https://www.w3.org/WAI/standards-guidelines/aria/) &mdash; Provides an ontology of roles, states, and properties that define accessible user interface elements and can be used to improve the accessibility and interoperability of web content and applications.
* [HTML specification](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/) &mdash; The core markup language for the web, HTML, as well as numerous APIs like Web Sockets, Web Workers, localStorage, etc.
* [Notifications and Feedback](https://www.w3.org/WAI/perspective-videos/notifications/) &mdash; Is one of the Web accessibility perspectives videos that show accessibility features and how they impact people with disabilities.
* [Keyboard Compatibility](https://www.w3.org/WAI/perspective-videos/keyboard/) &mdash; Is one of the Web accessibility perspectives videos that show accessibility features and how they impact people with disabilities.
* [Text to Speech](https://www.w3.org/WAI/perspective-videos/speech/) &mdash; Is one of the Web accessibility perspectives videos that show accessibility features and how they impact people with disabilities.
* [Clear Layout and Design](https://www.w3.org/WAI/perspective-videos/layout/) &mdash; Is one of the Web accessibility perspectives videos that show accessibility features and how they impact people with disabilities.
